Consul: Adding Fargate to AWS ECS (#1935)
hashicorp/web-unified-docs: content/consul/v1.21.x/content/docs/deploy/server/ecs/fargate.mdx

---

# Deploy Consul to AWS Fargate

The following instructions describe how to use Terraform to deploy the Consul Docker image to Amazon Web Services Fargate, utilising the AWS ECS runtime. For a complete and functional example, refer to the [Consul on Fargate](https://github.com/hashicorp-education/learn-consul-fargate) Github repository.

## Overview

AWS Fargate is a serverless compute engine that you can use to run Consul server agents as an ECS task. This simplifies deployment and maintenance, because the runtime environment is not managed by the practitioner. When running on AWS Fargate, it is important for the Consul cluster to have a persistant storage - for which we recommend using the AWS Elastic File System. Furthermore, once you have a functional Consul server cluster, you can then run Consul dataplanes alongside ECS workloads for service discovery and service mesh. The general outline of the procedure is:

1. Create a Fargate enabled ECS cluster
1. Create a Fargate compatible ECS task definition for the Consul servers
1. Create an ECS service of a Fargate launch type for the Consul servers task

> 1. Create and attach an EFS persistant storage for the Consul tasks

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Create an ECS cluster with Fargate enabled
1. Create an ECS task definition for the Consul servers that is compatible with Fargate
1. Create an ECS service for the Consul servers task that has a Fargate launch type 
1. Create and attach an EFS persistant storage for the Consul tasks
```

  name            = "consul-ecs-consul-server"
  cluster         = aws_ecs_cluster.consul-ecs-cluster.arn
  task_definition = aws_ecs_task_definition.consul-server-task.arn
  desired_count   = 1
  network_configuration {
    subnets          = module.vpc.private_subnets
    assign_public_ip = false
    security_groups  = [aws_security_group.ecs_service.id]
  }
  launch_type = "FARGATE"
  service_registries {
    registry_arn   = aws_service_discovery_service.server.arn
    container_name = "consul-server"
  }
  # [...]
}
```

</CodeBlockConfig>

## Configure Consul servers on Fargate to use persistant EFS storage

We recommend that you utilise the Amazon Elastic File System (EFS) when running Consul on Fargate. The EFS service provides a persistant and fully managed elastic NFS file system storage for your Consul compute instances on AWS Fargate. To learn more about using AWS EFS volumes on Fargate and ECS, refer to the related [AWS EFS documentation](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonECS/latest/developerguide/efs-volumes.html), and to the [aws_efs_file_system](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/hashicorp/aws/latest/docs/resources/efs_file_system) Terraform resource.

> First, you will define the EFS resources needed in the Terraform files: a file system, its mount target, and an EFS access point to provide persistent storage for the Consul server container data directory. This allows the Consul server to persist its state across task restarts, rescheduling, or updates. The `subnet_id` and `security_groups` parameters an will vary based on your environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To provide persistent storage for the Consul server container data directory, begin by defining the EFS resources you need in the Terraform files: 

- a file system 
- a mount target
- an EFS access point 

These resources allow the Consul server to persist its state across task restarts, rescheduling, and updates. The `subnet_id` and `security_groups` parameters may vary based on your environment.
```

Then you will create a network security group rule that allows the Consul server workloads to access the EFS storage. Furthermore, you will set up your Consul servers to use the EFS mount path for their Consul data storage.

Finally, you will attach the EFS volume to the ECS task definition, and define the container mountpoints for this volume.

<CodeBlockConfig filename="aws-efs.tf">

```hcl
resource "aws_efs_file_system" "efs-consul-server" {
    creation_token = "efs-example"
    performance_mode = "generalPurpose"
    throughput_mode = "bursting"
    encrypted = "true"
    tags = {
        Name = "StorageConsulEFS"
    }
}

resource "aws_efs_mount_target" "efs-mt-consul-server" {
    file_system_id  = "${aws_efs_file_system.efs-consul-server.id}"
    subnet_id = "${module.vpc.private_subnets[0]}"
    security_groups = ["${data.aws_security_group.vpc_default.id}"]
    depends_on = [ aws_efs_file_system.efs-consul-server ]
}

resource "aws_efs_access_point" "efs-consul-server-ap" {
    file_system_id = aws_efs_file_system.efs-consul-server.id
}
```

</CodeBlockConfig>

> Next, add a security group rule to allow the Consul server to access the EFS file system over the NFS protocol. The following example adds an ingress rule to the default security group of the VPC that allows TCP traffic on port 2049 from any source IP address. This security group rule definition has the `cidr_blocks` field open to any client. In a production environment, you should restrict this to only allow traffic from trusted sources that are allowed to access the EFS file system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, add a security group rule to allow the Consul server to access the EFS file system over the NFS protocol. The following example adds an ingress rule to the default security group of the VPC that allows TCP traffic on port 2049 from any source IP address. This security group rule definition has the `cidr_blocks` field open to any client. 

In a production environment, you should restrict this security group rule to only allow traffic from trusted sources that are allowed to access the EFS file system.
```

  protocol                 = "tcp"
  cidr_blocks              = [ "0.0.0.0/0" ]
  security_group_id        = module.vpc.default_security_group_id
}
```

</CodeBlockConfig>

The following Terraform code creates the necessary command for the Consul server to use the EFS access point as the data directory for the Consul server. The `local.consul_server_command` field of the Consul server container definition passes boot instructions for Consul to create a subfolder in the AWS Fargate mount path with its node name, and use that path for its data directory.

<CodeBlockConfig filename="consul-server-task.tf" highlight="10">

```hcl
locals {
  node_name = "consul-ecs-consul-server"
  consul_server_command = <<EOF
ECS_IPV4=$(curl -s $ECS_CONTAINER_METADATA_URI_V4 | jq -r '.Networks[0].IPv4Addresses[0]')
exec consul agent -server \
  -bootstrap \
  -ui \
  -advertise "$ECS_IPV4" \
  -client 0.0.0.0 \
  -data-dir '/consul/${local.node_name}/consul-data' \
  -hcl 'node_name = "${local.node_name}"' \
  -hcl 'datacenter = "dc1"' \
  -hcl 'connect { enabled = true }' \
  -hcl 'enable_central_service_config = true' \
  -hcl='ports { grpc = 8502 }' \
EOF
}
```

</CodeBlockConfig>

> Finally, in your Consul server ECS task resource definition, add the `volume` and `mountPoints` configuration to mount the EFS storage for the Consul server data directory. The `volume` block defines a volume named `consul-data` that uses the EFS file system created in the previous step. The `mountPoints` block mounts the `consul-data` volume to the `/consul` directory in the Consul server container, which is the default data directory for Consul server containers. This configuration ensures that the Consul server can persist its data to the EFS file system, allowing for data durability and availability across task restarts and rescheduling.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, add the `volume` and `mountPoints` configuration to your Consul server ECS task resource definition. The `volume` block defines a volume named `consul-data` that uses the EFS file system created in the previous step. The `mountPoints` block mounts the `consul-data` volume to the `/consul` directory in the Consul server container, which is the default data directory for Consul server containers. 

This configuration ensures that the Consul server can persist its data to the EFS file system, allowing for data durability and availability across task restarts and rescheduling.
```
